what is known about their epidemiology and clinical relevance.

== History ==

=== Recognition and diagnosis ===

The earliest recognition of pancreatic cancer has been attributed to the 18th-century Italian scientist Giovanni Battista Morgagni, the historical father of modern-day anatomic pathology, who claimed to have traced several cases of cancer in the pancreas. Many 18th and 19th-century physicians were skeptical about the existence of the disease, given the similar appearance of pancreatitis. Some case reports were published in the 1820s and 1830s, and a genuine histopathologic diagnosis was eventually recorded by the American clinician Jacob Mendes Da Costa, who also doubted the reliability of Morgagni's interpretations. By the start of the 20th century, cancer of the head of the pancreas had become a well-established diagnosis.

Regarding the recognition of PanNETs, the possibility of cancer of the islet cells was initially suggested in 1888. The first case of hyperinsulinism due to a tumor of this type was reported in 1927. Recognition of a non-insulin-secreting type of PanNET is generally ascribed to the American surgeons, R. M. Zollinger and E. H. Ellison, who gave their names to Zollinger–Ellison syndrome, after postulating the existence of a gastrin-secreting pancreatic tumor in a report of two cases of unusually severe peptic ulcers published in 1955. In 2010, the WHO recommended that PanNETs be referred to as "neuroendocrine" rather than "endocrine" tumors.

Small precancerous neoplasms for many pancreatic cancers are being detected at greatly increased rates by modern medical imaging. One type, the intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) was first described by Japanese researchers in 1982. It was noted in 2010 that: "For the next decade, little attention was paid to this report; however, over the subsequent 15 years, there has been a virtual explosion in the recognition of this tumor."

=== Surgery ===

The first reported partial pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed by the Italian surgeon Alessandro Codivilla in 1898, but the patient only survived 18 days before succumbing to complications. Early operations were compromised partly because of mistaken beliefs that people would die if their duodenum were removed, and also, at first, if the flow of pancreatic juices stopped. Later it was thought, also mistakenly, that the pancreatic duct could simply be tied up without serious adverse effects; in fact, it will very often leak later on. In 1907–1908, after some more unsuccessful operations by other surgeons, experimental procedures were tried on corpses by French surgeons.

In 1912 the German surgeon Walther Kausch was the first to remove large parts of the duodenum and pancreas together (en bloc). This was in Breslau, now Wrocław, in Poland. In 1918 it was demonstrated, in operations on dogs, that it is possible to survive even after complete removal of the duodenum, but no such result was reported in human surgery until 1935, when the American surgeon Allen Oldfather Whipple published the results of a series of three operations at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in New York. Only one of the patients had the duodenum entirely removed, but he survived for two years before dying of metastasis to the liver.

The first operation was unplanned, as cancer was only discovered in the operating theater. Whipple's success showed the way for the future, but the operation remained a difficult and dangerous one until recent decades. He published several refinements to his procedure, including the first total removal of the duodenum in 1940, but he only performed a total of 37 operations.

The discovery in the late 1930s that vitamin K prevented bleeding with jaundice, and the development of blood transfusion as an everyday process, both improved post-operative survival, but about 25% of people never left hospital alive as late as the 1970s. In the 1970s a group of American surgeons wrote urging that the procedure was too dangerous and should be abandoned. Since then outcomes in larger centers have improved considerably, and mortality from the operation is often less than 4%.

In 2006 a report was published of a series of 1,000 consecutive pancreatico-duodenectomies performed by a single surgeon from Johns Hopkins Hospital between 1969 and 2003. The rate of these operations had increased steadily over this period, with only three of them before 1980, and the median operating time reduced from 8.8 hours in the 1970s to 5.5 hours in the 2000s, and mortality within 30 days or in hospital was only 1%. Another series of 2,050 operations at the Massachusetts General Hospital between 1941 and 2011 showed a similar picture of improvement.

== Research directions ==

Early-stage research on pancreatic cancer includes studies of genetics and early detection, treatment at different cancer stages, surgical strategies, and targeted therapies, such as inhibition of growth factors, immune therapies, and vaccines. Bile acids may have a role in the carcinogenesis of pancreatic cancer.

A key question is the timing of events as the disease develops and progresses – particularly the role of diabetes, and how and when the disease spreads. The knowledge that new onset of diabetes can be an early sign of the disease could facilitate timely diagnosis and prevention if a workable screening strategy can be developed. The European Registry of Hereditary Pancreatitis and Familial Pancreatic Cancer (EUROPAC) trial is aiming to determine whether regular screening is appropriate for people with a family history of the disease.

Keyhole surgery (laparoscopy) rather than Whipple's procedure, particularly in terms of recovery time, is being evaluated. Irreversible electroporation is a relatively novel ablation technique with potential for downstaging and prolonging survival in persons with locally advanced disease, especially for tumors in proximity to peri-pancreatic vessels without risk of vascular trauma.

Efforts are underway to develop new drugs, including those targeting molecular mechanisms for cancer onset, stem cells, and cell proliferation. A further approach involves the use of immunotherapy, such as oncolytic viruses. Galectin-specific mechanisms of the tumor microenvironment are under study.

Because of the highly hypoxic nature of the environment, Hypoxia-activated prodrugs such as CP-506 especially in combination with immunotherapy are also being studied.

The nanoparticles assist in the sustained and targeted release of a drug regimen to cancer/tumor-specific sites rather than affecting healthy cells, leading to negligible or no toxicity.

== See also ==

Gastrointestinal cancer

Pancreatic Cancer Action Network (organization in the US)

Lustgarten Foundation for Pancreatic Cancer Research (organization in the US)

List of people diagnosed with pancreatic cancer

== References ==

== External links ==